---
layout: post
title:  "Why Open Source Developers Don't Contribute Back"
date:   2013-05-24 00:07:00
permalink: /blog/why-open-source-developers-dont-contribute-back
disqus_identifier: 7
---

As I sit in the airport and enjoy my last pint of some ironically named local micro-brew, I start to think about the last 5 days I spent in Portland.  I travelled to Oregon to attend [DrupalCon](http://portland2013.drupal.org).  DrupalCon is a semi-annual gathering of people who use Drupal, an open-source content management system written in PHP. It had been 3 years since the last time I attended, and my experience this time around was far more satisfiying than the former.  I came to the convention more seasoned this year.  I came with dozen or so more client projects under my belt.  I came excited to re-connect with community members I had worked on some of those projects with.  I came to Portland this year not only as a consumer but as a contributor to open-source software.  It feels great.

Don't get me wrong, I am not popular in any open-source community by any means.  In fact, It took me quite a bit of time to be able to say, "I contribute to open-source software".  I have been writing code for most of my life.  I started when I was 13.  I turn 30 later this year.  Most of this time has been spent building things with open-source tools.  I was proud to say that I *used* open-source software.  The key word is *used*.  I was a user of open-source software; a consumer.  I figured that the smartest of the smart, best in breed developers were building all of these tools and packages out of the kindness of their hearts.  Dont get me wrong, many of these folk are extradonarily talented.  It was not until I started meeting some of these developers and realized that for the most part, talent aside, they were just regular people trying to solve problems, just like me.  So why wasn't I contributing?  Why are most of us just consumers?  Here are a few of the reasons:

1. **Fear**: I think fear may be one the most common reasons.  I started working with the CakePHP open-source MVC framework in the mid-2000's.  I learned the ins and outs as the challenges arose.  Though, I was really just learning how to read API documentation and plug and play things as I needed them.  If something went wrong within the core codebase, I would search around the internets to see if anyone else had the same issue.  Sometimes, I would find a solution.  Sometimes, I would not.  I never thought about creating a solutions, well not atleast in the form of patches or anything like that.  I thought I was not skilled enough to fiddling around in codebase.  I thought things like "Why do I think I could do this better than the authors?".  I was afraid.

2. **Lack of Information**: As I started writing more and more custom code within Drupal, I was excited about the opportunity to develop and share modules.  How to go about this was not that clear to me.  I think this is very common.  It took me quite a while to figure out how the application process and release systems worked.  It was until someone led me in the right direction, when I started to "get it".  Over the last few years we have witnessed GitHub become the home for thousands of popular open-source projects.  Each project have different rules for when to open pull requests or issues.  Some projects will ignore your contributions completely if the subject line in the issue description is not in the proper format.

3. **"I just want it to work"**: When it is all said and done, software is written to be used to help solve problems through technology.  It is not unusual that the majority of the users of software and tools will be consumers with no interest in contributing back.  There is absolutely nothing wrong with this.

There is no rule that says developers are required to contribute back to the tools that they use.  I have found contributing to be very fulfilling. I think it is important that seasoned developers take the time to help encourage and empower the consumers to become contributors.  Whether that be via mentorship, a snark-free code review or documentation.

**How to Contribute to Drupal** - [http://drupal.org/contribute](http://drupal.org/contribute)
